[DEP-05]: Introduce `EtcdOpsTask` CRD (#1129)
gardener/etcd-druid: docs/usage/using-etcdopstask.md

# Using EtcdOpsTask

`EtcdOpsTask` is a custom resource provided by the Etcd Druid project to facilitate various out-of-band tasks on Etcd clusters managed by the Druid operator. It was initially proposed in [this design document](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/05-etcdopstask.md).

## Overview

`EtcdOpsTask` allows operators to execute one-time operational tasks on an Etcd cluster. This includes operations like triggering on-demand snapshots (full or delta). The controller manages the task lifecycle, executing the operation and updating the task status to reflect success or failure.

## How Operators Can Use EtcdOpsTask

> >NOTE: As of now, `EtcdOpsTask` primarily supports on-demand snapshot operations. Future versions may introduce additional task types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> As of v0.34.0, `EtcdOpsTask` primarily supports on-demand snapshot operations. Future versions may introduce additional task types.
```

### Creating an EtcdOpsTask

To trigger an operational task, create an `EtcdOpsTask` resource in the same namespace as the target Etcd cluster. The `spec.config` field specifies the type of operation to perform. This field is of union type, allowing one and only one operation to be defined per task:

```yaml
apiVersion: druid.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: EtcdOpsTask
metadata:
  name: on-demand-snapshot
  namespace: default
spec:
  etcdRef: etcd-main
  config:
    onDemandSnapshot:
      type: full  # or delta
      #isFinal: false
      timeoutSecondsFull: 480
      #timeoutSecondsDelta: 60
   ttlSecondsAfterFinished: 360   
  
```
* The above example creates an `EtcdOpsTask` named `on-demand-snapshot` that triggers an on-demand snapshot for the Etcd cluster referenced by `etcd-main` in the namespace where the etcdopstask is created. Some tasks might not require an etcd reference and hence this field is optional.

> * The task will be automatically deleted 360 seconds after completion as defined by `ttlSecondsAfterFinished`. If not specified, the default TTL is 3600 seconds (1 hour).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The task will automatically be deleted after completion as defined by the `spec.ttlSecondsAfterFinished`. If not specified, the default TTL is `3600 seconds (1 hour)`.
```
IMO we should just be explaining our spec and defaults rather than the `360` value we took as an example.

> * The spec field is immutable and is enforced via `CEL` expressions.

Reviewer 2: Maybe you can give a link to CEL expressions here?

### Task Lifecycle

Once created, the EtcdOpsTask progresses through the following states:

1. **Pending**: Task is accepted but not yet acted upon
2. **InProgress**: Task is currently being executed
3. **Succeeded**: Task completed successfully
4. **Failed**: Task execution failed.
5. **Rejected**: Task was rejected as it failed to fulfill required pre-conditions. This set of pre-conditions varies from task to task.

Once a task reaches a terminal state (Succeeded, Failed, or Rejected), it will be eligible for automatic cleanup based on the specified TTL(`spec.ttlSecondsAfterFinished`).

#### Task Phases

The etcdopstask controller follows a handler-driven flow with three phases:
- **Admit**: Validates preconditions (RBAC, duplicates, config). Sets `lastOperation.type=Admit`; task moves `Pending → InProgress` on success, or `Rejected` on failure.
- **Execute**: Performs the requested operation (e.g., on-demand snapshot). Sets `lastOperation.type=Execution`; task transitions to `Succeeded` or `Failed`.
- **Cleanup**: Handles cleanup of the task and any deployed resources. Sets `lastOperation.type=Cleanup`; EtcdopsTask resource is deleted after TTL expiry.

> ### Monitoring Task Status

Reviewer 2: At this point, the field `lastOperation` is not explained till here. Might lead to confusion as to where it's defined when operators read this.

  lastOperation:
    description: Task Execution phase is in Progress
    lastUpdateTime: "2025-12-03T23:31:50Z"
    runID: e094cd10-e756-4132-b52a-50c164d1df2a
    state: InProgress
    type: Execute
   lastErrors:
   - code: ERR_EXECUTE_HTTP_REQUEST
     description: '[Operation: Execution, Code: ERR_EXECUTE_HTTP_REQUEST] message:
        failed to execute HTTP request, cause: Post "http://etcd-test-client.default:8080/snapshot/full":
        dial tcp 10.96.99.172:8080: connect: connection refused'
     observedAt: "2025-12-03T23:31:53Z"
  
```

### Task Cleanup

EtcdOpsTask resources along with any dependent resources (Eg: Jobs, Pods etc.) are automatically cleaned up after a configurable TTL once they reach a terminal state (Succeeded, Failed, or Rejected).

### Supported Task Types

Currently supported task types:

- **OnDemandSnapshot**: Triggers an on-demand backup snapshot
  - `Full`: Creates a complete snapshot
  - `Delta`: Creates an incremental snapshot

### Best Practices

1. **Unique Names**: Use descriptive, unique names for tasks to avoid conflicts
2. **Monitor Status**: Check task status before creating duplicate operations. This will help avoid duplicate tasks.

> 3. **RBAC**: Ensure proper permissions are configured for the Etcd Druid service account.

Reviewer 3: The same role/clusterrole is used by every controller in druid. So ideally information about RBAC should be present only in the `implementing a new task type` doc, since the developer will need to take care of configuring necessary permissions to create/access/delete certain resource types as required by the task.
